---
date:    2011-09-20 06:20:39
author:  Scott Baker
email:   jcgrGZF56Mpm.tsswfrzt0TlxYYNW.1Frp_DPfddTWdbvDPypc0BiQ
link:     http://www.pawprint.net/
---

I'm afraid I'll have to disagree.

I believe that this new rapid release will be the thing that kills
Firefox (It may already have) I'm a power user, and I hang out with a
lot of other power users and as was correctly stated we live for the
extensions where typical users probably don't care. Keep in mind here
it was extensions to a large extent that won Firefox all it's initial
recognition.  However, due to the rapid release, extension developers
can't keep up and the majority of the power users I have spoken with
have been forced to do one of two things already:

a) Turn off automatic updates (where I'm at for now)  
b) Switch to chrome  

Power users are the ones friends and family come to for advice, the
ones that install software on people's machines who otherwise would be
running whichever browser came on the thing when they bought the
"package" from whichever vender they got it from. Power Users are your
best marketing resource - and Mozilla has made it very clear to most
power users that they simply don't care about us - their own software
ideals trump our needs. They have told their extension developers who
spent hours of their time to build great things on top of an API that
their time is less valuable then Mozilla's and you'll just have to
keep giving your time to suit the same ideals or bugger off.

This is not how you make a better web, it's how you shoot yourself in
the foot and promote people continuing to use browsers with perhaps
known security flaws so they can actually get their work done.

I love Firefox - it's been my favorite browser. Sadly though unless
this changes, I can't see continuing to use it and I find that really
sad. If there are a ton of bugs and significant platform changes are
required that solve them - push a major release that breaks the API
and then give people time to recover. Extensions developers will
understand that - what they won't understand is doing that every few
weeks, indefinitely.

I'm probably sending this plea to deaf ears - which is also sad, but I
would love to have Firefox back, I would love to see Mozilla come to
it's senses.
