---
date:    2011-09-21 03:39:53
author:  James Napolitano
email:   t562fVvRwX0h.yEBPU0UAsZowGsW_.xlNmCzreSwwEOVph9TiavBDIjNyb6QHHOYYU
---

> The second thing to know is that the core browser (“Gecko”) suffers
> from enormous technical debt. Like any large, 15-year-old piece of
> software, we have code in abundance that was written under too much
> time pressure to get it right, was written so long ago that nobody
> remembers how it works, isn’t comprehensively tested, or any
> combination of the above.

Can anyone provide more info about this? I know over the years there
have been a large amount of rewrites (dropping old gfx code for
cairo/thebes, replacing the html parser, roc's compositor work, etc.)
and outright code removals (e.g. old plugin technologies like
javaxpcom), with more planned. So, how many areas of the codebase (or
what fraction of the codebase) would still be old cruft that no one
knows how they work and rarely touch? As for the rest of the code, any
thoughts on its overall quality or design? There's also been lots of
deCOMtamination work for years; any idea of how much left is there to
be done? (I get the impression that it's a lot!).

> We also have major components that reasonably seemed like good ideas
> at the time, but have since proven to be a hindrance (XUL, XBL,
> XPConnect, etc). We have other major components that should have
> been recognized as bad ideas at the time, but weren’t (XPCOM, NSPR,
> etc). And we have code for which there is no excuse at all.

I suppose this (combined with the above) is part why Mozilla didn't
push its XULRunner platform as much as some were calling it to. IIUC,
the underlying technologies were flawed and/or needed significant work
to overhaul, refactor, and document. For instance, remote XUL had to
be disabled due to years of security problems; fixing all of them
would have essentially required rewriting the XUL code, which would
have taken away from efforts to support new standards like XBL2. Thus
it didn't make sense to encourage more people to build on top of all
these old technologies. This would have required more resources to
support them and it would have make it harder to make needed changes
to Gecko. However, this wasn't clearly stated, so people were left
wondering why on earth Mozilla had this great platform it wasn't
furthering; it seemed like such a waste.  (Another reason of course
was that Mozilla wanted people building on top of the standard web
platform.)
