---
slug:    11467
date:    2014-08-30 19:35:34
author:  Cat
email:   gPGnLs4qAGM+.kAfeAVqFwRjACOdY.7RWELP1ECA5UmIRl6K5_VM9v
---

"It takes only a couple sentences to state that your story is set in
the distant future Imperium of Man, in which women and men alike may
serve in any position in the military and are considered completely
equal; it takes constant vigilance over the course of the entire novel
to make sure that you don’t have the men in the Imperial Marines
taking extra risks to protect from enemy fire those of their fellow
grunts who happen to be women"

Especially since you shot yourself in the foot (possibly for effect,
in which case, bravo; you got it exactly right) at the start by
calling it the Imperium of *Man.*

But I think you have put your finger on the main issue I had with
Correia's novel.  His main character is a jerk who leads with
contempt, but receives respect in return.  It's as if nobody in the
novel realizes he's a jerk, despite how he acts.  (The scene where he
walked into the Japanese Embassy struck me as particularly
unbelievable in that regard.)

I suspect, in fact, that this is because the right-wing crowd think
that he *ought* to be able to behave contemptuously to the people
around him.  He's a strong man, right?  And the people he is treating
with contempt aren't real Americans for one reason or another.  And
they will respect him in return because he is strong and brave, and
because his contempt is "honest"--and if they don't respect him they
are evil and deserve their death or defeat.

And I'm over here going "ick, a bully; I don't care how strong he is
and I don't care if he faces death bravely, and I don't even care if
he is nice to his friends and people who agree with him, a
contemptuous bully is still a jerk."  And the main character being
unlikeable just makes the whole book a lot less enjoyable.

Different worldviews, I guess.
