slug:    7001
date:    2013-03-22 01:14:13
author:  Galia Ladiray Weiss
email:   ICU9rcD85f8P.77fpp3KBZTY94sjG.hyaK27GhdVRZeDl5Mu5oyOZnqRObT7Y=

Hey, I'm a woman (does it matter?) 20 years in CS. I started by only
reading Adria's post about the issue, and I was sad. Reading HER side
of the story I felt she was overreacting only in order to draw
attention to her.

This is unfortunate to ANY woman in the high tech industry, because it
again gives the impression of how fragile we are.  I am not fragile. I
know many women who are not, I actually do not know ANY woman that in
such circumstances, would not either laugh of the joke, or tell the
guy to shut up.

People defending women in scenario they would tell a man "just grow up
and handle it" are the worst kind of male chauvinist. (and I am not
talking about PyCon organiser, who probably just told the guys to shut
up, because she asked their help on that)

Now please close your eyes, imagine she is a white male, and 4 white
males behind him are making meat eating jokes, and he is a vegetarian
and is really sensitive about killing animals, what would your
reaction be now?

I don't think this is Adria's fault, people can be like that. The
problem is the public reaction. The dude was fired and she was fired
DUE to the public reaction. People should ignore attention seeking
"Adrias". Try to make the difference between real abuse stories and,
someone made me angry stories.

I agree on the death threats and any aggressive messages, she or he
receives. This is terrible, nothing justifies that. The worst is that
this is a part of human behavior and we can find it everywhere. Lets
us NOT be like that and help others around us to avoid this.
