src/posts/possibly-useful/more-notes-on-the-cross-platform-availability-of-header-files.md, before:

---
title: More Notes on the Cross-Platform Availability of Header Files
date: 2013-05-01 23:25
---

You may recall a month and a half ago I posted [Notes on the
Cross-Platform Availability of Header
Files](/possibly-useful/notes-on-the-cross-platform-availability-of-header-files/)
and then promptly had to take most of it down because it was
insufficiently researched. Well, the research is ongoing, but I've got a
shiny new set of results, some high-level conclusions, and several ways
Viewers Like You can help!

First, the high-level conclusions:

* Except perhaps in deeply-embedded environments, all of C89’s
  library is universally available.
* Code not intended to run on Windows can also assume most of C99 and
  much of POSIX. The less-ubiquitous headers from these categories
  are also the less-useful headers.
* Code that *is* intended to run on Windows should only use C89
  headers and `<stdint.h>`. If MSVC 2008 support is required, not
  even `<stdint.h>` can be used. (Windows compilers do provide a
  small handful of POSIX headers, but they do not contain the
  expected set of declarations!)
* Many different Unix variants ship a similar set of nonstandard
  headers. We don’t yet know whether the *contents* of these headers
  are reliable cross-platform.
* There is a large set of obsolete headers that are still widespread
  but should not be used in new code. This is underdocumented.

The full results may be seen here: [https://research.owlfolio.org/header-survey/](https://research.owlfolio.org/header-survey/)  
The raw data is here: [https://github.com/zackw/header-survey/](https://github.com/zackw/header-survey/)

If you want to help, we need more inventories (especially for OSes
further from the beaten path), and I'm also *very* interested in
improvements to the giant generated HTML table. Y'all on Planet Mozilla
can probably tell I'm not a Web designer. If you are an old beard, there
are also places where I'm not entirely sure of my methodology -- see the
README in the source repo.

Commit message:

2022 November broken link trawl 2/2: the cases requiring editing
also, ignore the previous commit for last-modified-date purposes and
commit the code changes that made it easy to drop in a “crawl for
broken links” plugin temporarily (not committing the plugin itself,
it is far too slow to have on all the time)

src/posts/possibly-useful/more-notes-on-the-cross-platform-availability-of-header-files.md, after:

---
title: More Notes on the Cross-Platform Availability of Header Files
date: 2013-05-01 23:25
---

You may recall a month and a half ago I posted [Notes on the
Cross-Platform Availability of Header
Files](/possibly-useful/notes-on-the-cross-platform-availability-of-header-files/)
and then promptly had to take most of it down because it was
insufficiently researched. Well, the research is ongoing, but I've got a
shiny new set of results, some high-level conclusions, and several ways
Viewers Like You can help!

First, the high-level conclusions:

* Except perhaps in deeply-embedded environments, all of C89’s
  library is universally available.
* Code not intended to run on Windows can also assume most of C99 and
  much of POSIX. The less-ubiquitous headers from these categories
  are also the less-useful headers.
* Code that *is* intended to run on Windows should only use C89
  headers and `<stdint.h>`. If MSVC 2008 support is required, not
  even `<stdint.h>` can be used. (Windows compilers do provide a
  small handful of POSIX headers, but they do not contain the
  expected set of declarations!)
* Many different Unix variants ship a similar set of nonstandard
  headers. We don’t yet know whether the *contents* of these headers
  are reliable cross-platform.
* There is a large set of obsolete headers that are still widespread
  but should not be used in new code. This is underdocumented.

The raw data is here: [https://github.com/zackw/header-survey/](https://github.com/zackw/header-survey/)

If you want to help, we need more inventories (especially for OSes
further from the beaten path), and I'm also interested in finding a
good way to crunch the raw data into something presentable.  (I used
to have a giant generated HTML table but I gave up on that, it was too
big to be readable.)  If you are an old beard, there are also places
where I'm not entirely sure of my methodology -- see the README in the
source repo.
