Files in this repository are under three different licenses, depending
on their function.

Whenever comments or metadata embedded in a specific file indicates
that that file is under a different license than the rules below would
dictate, the rules below yield to what it says in the file.

## Files containing _website content_

Unless otherwise indicated, everything under the `src` directory is to
be taken as website content; this file and `README.md` also.  These
files are typically text marked up in HTML or Markdown, images, and
other sorts of visual media.  They typically do not contain an
explicit statement of copyright or licensing.

These files are copyright 2007–present Zack Weinberg, _except_ the
files in the `comments` subdirectory, which are copyright the author
indicated in the file.  They are licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial license; see the file
[CC-BY-NC-4](/CC-BY-NC-4.md) for legal details.

Requests to make modified versions or derivative works of these files,
beyond “fair use”, for noncommercial purposes (e.g. translations) will
probably be granted, but you have to ask.  Requests to make commercial
use of these files will **not** be granted, and are very likely to
earn you a one-way trip to the spam dump.

## Files containing _code_

All files in the `layouts` and `lib` directories, and also the
top-level `index.js` file, contain code.  These files will normally
have an explicit statement of copyright and licensing in a comment at
the top of the file.  Any that don’t should be assumed to be copyright
2007–present Zack Weinberg and to be licensed under the GNU General
Public License, version 3.  See the file [GPL-3.txt](/GPL-3.txt) for
legal details of the GPL.

Redistribution and modification of these files, as permitted by their
respective licenses, is encouraged.  Requests to relicense anything
from the GPL to a more permissive license will be considered with
skepticism.

## Files containing _configuration_

Various short files at the top of the tree that serve to configure
development tools (e.g. `package.json`, `.editorconfig`,
`.eslintrc.yml`), and that do not contain any explicit statement of
copyright or licensing, are copyright 2022–present Zack Weinberg
and are licensed as follows:

> Copying and distribution of this file, with or without modification,
> are permitted in any medium without royalty and with no requirement
> to preserve notices.  This file is offered as-is, without any
> warranty.
