---
date:    2008-02-24 21:37:17
author:  madmanatw
email:   1XzZcy5_r2qV.1sokrtweETtw1kSv.4VvUvw6xoBPVrVLl9PDhKyC_nYOllj4H1g==
link:     https://madmanatw.livejournal.com/
replyto: 625
---

That's interesting. For example, in WoW, if you are a rogue, say,
every level increases the cap on your lockpicking by 5, but then you
need to get the skillups. You seem to be proposing a reversal of that-
the use of the skill raises the cap, and then that means you can
allocate points there when you level up.

It strikes me as a good way to implement what you propose in the first
paragraph---doing them to raise the cap would be, in essence, how you
could tell that someone had done the activity enough to deserve being
able to spend points in it.

I would suggest that the limit to how high you can raise the caps be
level dependent, so you cannot at level 1 raise your cap to a point
that cannot be satisfied until you are level 15, pointswise. However,
I wouldn't bother restricting how many skills they can increase the
cap on.

To clarify: say your cap is 5*level. Say you get 20 points to spend
each time you level. So while working on level 6, with caps currently
at 25, you could cast a bunch of Nature spells (raising its cap to
30), pick some locks, fight with a sword, use a shield, hide in
shadows, cast some shadow spells, and use a bow. You raise all 7 of
those skills' caps to 30, but when you hit level 6, you only get 20
points to spend, and it would take 35 points to have your actual
values in those skills reach the cap.

Now the next time you level up, you get 20 more points, and you can
backfill in skills that you had previously raised the cap in. You
would probably never go a level without raising the cap on
_something_, since your primary skills you will always want to be
matching your level progression, but you could spread the points more
thinly among secondary skills.

Sounds definitely doable to me.
