---
date:    2014-05-01 11:43:44
author:  Zack Weinberg
email:   hv6UvoMXQ+J_.8J_0qQ2W3ec78EWo.w1H3h_b48WzjE2XNYwFB
link:     https://www.owlfolio.org/
---

Unfortunately I don't have time today to discuss this as much as I'd
like, but I can respond briefly to Gerv's questions:

Yes, I am seriously proposing that "the government should simply give
everyone $24,000 regardless of other income", even though that is
twice the (current) Federal budget in aggregate.  It replaces Social
Security, SDI, unemployment insurance, and a bunch of other
entitlements, which collectively add up to something like a third of
the existing budget, but still, this is not revenue-neutral nor is it
meant to be: this is, deliberately, a thought exercise in much more
aggressive redistribution of wealth than we currently undertake.

As to minimum wage, one of the reasons unconditional basic incomes
find favor among economists regardless of their political leanings is
that they may mean you don't <i>need</i> a minimum wage anymore.
Among the potential upsides of this plan are that a class of
organizations---mostly not for-profit businesses---will be able to
draw more volunteer labor and/or pay only token amounts, and there
will no longer be political pressure to preserve jobs that could
either be done by robots, or do not need doing at all.

As to people who will see substantial cuts in their take-home pay due
to this plan: I do in fact expect base salaries to come down as a
consequence (this is <i>desired</i>; that's what I mean by "income tax
should be Pigovian"), and for corporations to, at first, try to
slither around the rules by enhancing other aspects of their
compensation packages.  This is (part of) why there are no categories
of income, and this is is why I am not 100% on the "long-term
investment accounts" idea.  I think that, should a miracle occur and
the reforms actually be enacted, it would make most sense to wait
about five years to see what the second-order consequences were, then
adjust as necessary.

(If you are envisioning that the very rich have more ability to shift
money around to avoid taxation: that is already illegal.  I do expect
that the IRS enforcement department would need to be beefed up for at
least a few years.)

(An optional line item in this reform, which did not make it into the
final draft, is "one-time punitive confiscation of all
individually-held assets in excess of $1 billion", which would, apart
from everything else, put a major dent in the extremely rich cohort's
ability to buy politicians.)
