slug:    11435
date:    2014-07-30 04:13:20
author:  Sander
email:   pffBghkM6Fn1.2Vuh5+9RaP8CYpxQ.YBPzHRjY4QLZvyj1kfUjC314ZTSP2X+s7fvy
replyto: 11434

If the positioning of "no award" above the Wheel of Time is based
_chiefly_ on your usenet memory (rather than your impression of the
first book), I hope the following will make you reconsider:

Hating the Wheel of Time was the "in thing" from about the 6th book
onward, presumably triggered mainly because the pacing of the books
changes several times throughout the series as the scope increases,
and this is not something everyone enjoys as much. Additionally, a
very significant number of people discovered the books shortly before
then, and book 6 or 7 was the first book they had to wait for (and get
back into the flow for). So you are remembering the height of the
negativism which came out of that, far beyond what the series actually
merited. (Once rabid Wheel of Time fans were defecting in droves to
become A Song of Ice and Fire fans. ("George R.R. Martin would _never_
take as long to finish a book as Robert Jordan does nowadays!" was an
oft-heard comment.))

The series as a whole certainly has many flaws, and yes, the first
book starts out extremely predictably (purposefully, and probably also
necessarily back then), but the (positive) influence WoT has had on
the genre does merit acknowledgment (and reward?). The level of
worldbuilding seen in WoT, and the consistency therein, is still
unparalleled. (This goes all the way up to the phases of the moon, and
minor merchants who in other series would be completely throwaway
characters, but in WoT will be briefly seen a couple of books later
again, their livelihood disrupted by the events in the world, and so
now changing the pattern of their lives to encompass that. You won't
see such details unless you pay very close attention, but they surely
add texture.)
