Title: Announcing readings.owlfolio.org
Date: 2015-03-30 12:32
Slug: announcing-readings

I'd like to announce my new project,
[`readings.owlfolio.org`](https://readings.owlfolio.org), where I will
be reading and reviewing papers from the academic literature mostly
(but not exclusively) about information security.  I made a false
start at this near the end of 2013 (it is the same site that's been
linked under "readings" in the top bar since then) but now I have a
posting queue and a rhythm going.  Expect three to five reviews a
week.  It's not going to be syndicated to Planet Mozilla, but I may
mention it here when I post something I think is of particular
interest to that audience.

Longtime readers of _this_ blog will notice that it has been
redesigned and matches `readings`.  That process is not 100% complete,
but it's close enough that I feel comfortable inviting people to kick
the tires.  Feedback is welcome, particularly regarding readability
and organization; but unfortunately you're going to have to email it
to me, because the new CMS has no comment system.  (The old comments
have been preserved.)  I'd also welcome recommendations of comment
systems which are self-hosted, open-source, database-free, and don't
involve me manually copying comments out of my email.  There will
probably be a technical postmortem on the new CMS eventually.

(I know about the pages that are still using the old style sheet.)
