---
slug:    10971
date:    2014-03-24 18:17:06
author:  DaveG
email:   C8XrZOqzCz0R.X+GEVhnZiqmD1Ok6.dlMQLTUrWy_+OHUH8+xjQzHq93CMVA==
...

Once HTTP 2.0 starts rolling out, we need to start treating it as the
new normal. If it is the case that an insecure mode will exist within
the spec, but certain browsers refuse to support it, that doesn't
change anything. HTTP 2.0 + TLS 1.2 will be the expected platform and
HTTP 1.1 will exist only for legacy support. It is irrelevant how long
that will be. I personally think that every feature that can be served
over HTTP 1.1 at that time should be effectively frozen. It will
unarguably exist for backwards compatibility reasons only and should
be treated as such. Halting the release of new features on old
known-to-be-flawed protocols is a very good idea.

Not only would it force everyone to adopt new standards, but it would
provide a simple cut-off point for backwards compatibility. Nobody
ever wants to "break the web", but with HTTP 2 we've got a sort of
clean slate. There will be the legacy pages sent out to old browsers
and the full version sent over HTTP 2. It will be a very clear point
that can be used to decide what features to use that doesn't involve
UA sniffing. More complex fixes and changes to HTML and TLS could be
done without having to worry about interoperability with ancient
browsers. A package of HTTP 2 + TLS 3 + HTML 6 could be put together
with whatever "web breaking" changes need to be done without having to
worry about old browsers at all. We could then just say this is the
new stack of what we use, but the old is still supported with no
changes. It's much cleaner than phasing in bits and pieces at a time
like is being done now. It's also a hell of a lot simpler to just have
an "old" and a "new" mode, and much easier to explain to people.
