---
title: Review of Brütal Legend
date: 2010-05-01 00:00
slug: brutal-legend
...

Here we go with another entry in the occasional series of reviews of
games that everyone has already played (because I refuse to pay more
than US$20 for a game, and new releases cost $60 these days).  This
time, it's [Brütal Legend][], Tim Schafer's epic about love, justice,
and the power of rock and roll, set in the land of all album covers,
starring Jack Black and a whole bunch of heavy metal musicians as
themselves.

[Brütal Legend]: https://kotaku.com/brutal-legend-review-testing-its-metal-452582775

This game is worth playing just for the chance to drive the
protagonist's hot rod around and see all the epic scenery.  The art
department had *fun* with this game.  So did the character modelers.
They licensed about a hundred classic metal tracks for the background
music, which means it's thematically appropriate, and never gets
repetitive enough to earworm you.  (The magical guitar solos, on the
other hand, I got a bit tired of.) The gameplay itself is a little
spotty, but I think that's been well covered elsewhere.  My main beef
was with poor integration of the side quests into the story line---you
don't benefit much from doing them, even though they could have added
quite a bit of interest and strategic ramification.  The up side of
that, though, is that I never felt like I was being forced to
level-grind.  There was one infuriating point where me and Pam spent
*three hours* losing one stage battle over and over again, but that
was because we were doing it wrong.

So that's all good, but now I want to complain, at length, about the
storyline.

<!--more-->

## I am about to spoil the ENTIRE PLOT.  You have been warned.

Problem numero uno is, of course, that the entire Drowning Doom arc
could have been avoided if Eddie hadn't picked up the [idiot ball][]
upon overhearing Doviculus in the ruins of Lionwhyte's castle.  Eddie
is genre-savvy enough that he should have assumed Doviculus knew they
were there and was deliberately trying to deceive them.  (I think
Doviculus doesn't ever *lie* in the technical sense, but I think we
all know just how little that means.)  Eddie is level-headed enough to
be head roadie for a boyband whose members are all too dumb to live.
Eddie is perfectly aware that Lita is wound way too tight, has issues
with Ophelia, and has just had to watch her brother get killed.  Eddie
isn't the kind of asshole who claims to trust someone when nobody else
does, in order to get them into bed.  Ditching Ophelia was way the
hell out of character.  Yeah, she's clearly not telling him something
important, but I see his in-character reaction as something like "Now
is not the time for this, but when we get somewhere safe, you and me
and Lita are going to sit down and have a long talk.  I still trust
you, but I need you to trust me with the whole story."  This does take
away Doviculus' big reveal at the end, but screw him, why should the
antagonist always get the big reveal?

It's not like there was no other way to arrange for the "Metal versus
Goth" battles, either.  The most obvious fix would be for the
protagonists to decide they have to have the power of the Sea of Black
Tears to stand a chance against the Tainted Coil.  It's Ophelia who
has the best odds of being able to control it, but at first she can't,
and they have to fight her a bit.  Or else it's Lita who loses it and
throws herself into the Sea.  Either way, this probably couldn't have
been dragged out as far as the as-written storyline did, but the
Tainted Coil deserved a bit more screen time as the immediate enemy,
anyway.  And would it not have been *even more awesome* if Ironheade
and the Drowning Doom could have teamed up?

I was also disappointed in the, um, complete lack of closure at the
end of the game.  Okay, Drowned Ophelia was a doppelganger created by
the Sea of Black Tears, and now we have the real one back, but it was
the real Ophelia who got ditched in the snow outside the ruined,
demon-infested castle.  I'd expect her to be more than a little angry
and hurt, still.  The antagonist leaders are all dead but all four
armies still have squads running around the map attacking each other,
with no explanation given.  In the closing sequence Eddie drives off
into the sunset, without Ophelia (wtf?), we see her shed one black
tear (I have to assume this is a sequel hook because otherwise it
makes no sense), and after that all the protagonists are off in their
own corners of the map and you can have a little wordless scene with
each one, but that's it.  Yeah, they're giving you a chance to drive
around and finish up side-quests, ok.  Still not *satisfying*, and I
cannot be bothered to get to 100% completion just to see if there's
another cutscene.  (Might be different if someone assured me there
*was* another cutscene, although maybe I should just go find it on
Youtube.)

Even if these small-scale plot problems were resolved, it doesn't seem
to me that the story that the game tells is the story it should have
told.  Is the ultimate metal epic really just about how generic bondage
demons manipulate power metal musicians into fighting first their hair
metal counterparts and then some goths?  I don't *think* so.  It's not
about subgenres of rock fighting each other, it's not about rock and
roll versus the blues, it's not both of those versus country and
western, it's not even about electric versus acoustic.   (Although it
certainly could *appear* to be about each of these in turn, as we peel
back layer upon layer of manipulative level bosses.)  The ultimate
metal epic ought to be about nothing less than good music versus bad
music; to be precise, Music With Rocks In versus Extruded Music
Product.  Eddie, Ophelia, Lars, and Lita travel the land assembling a
motley crew (pun intended) of every kind of musician who ever played,
because no lesser force can stand against the ultimate evil.  And what
could that be but ... the record industry? (It occurs to me that this
is the plot of *[We Will Rock You][]*, and that's just about right.)

I'm not sure there's a place for the Tainted Coil in a game that's
telling that story, but you know, I'm okay with that.  They weren't
that interesting.  I'd rather have had more shout-outs to the great
heroes of music, anyway.  Where were Freddie Mercury and Janis Joplin
and John Lennon and Bob Marley?  Buddy Holly?  B.B. King? Heck, where
was Leo Fender?  (Okay, Leo Fender was probably one of the Titans.
BUT STILL.)

[idiot ball]: http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/IdiotBall
[We Will Rock You]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/We_Will_Rock_You_%28musical%29
