---
title: Plot and setting for a hypothetical roguelike
date: 2008-02-19 18:33
slug: roguelike-setting
...

As mentioned in
[the first of these posts](http://zwol.livejournal.com/41755.html),
one of the biggest things I'd like to experiment with in a new
roguelike is the setting and plot. In particular I don't want the plot
to be a big MacGuffin hunt.
[Responding to that](http://www.crummy.com/2007/10/15/3), Leonard
correctly pointed out that Nethack is a MacGuffin hunt because it has
no plot, and outlined some possibilities for doing something about
that. In this post I'm going to outline the sort of plot I have in
mind and how it might mesh with Leonard's suggestions.

<!--more-->

The game begins in a country not unlike that of Hope Mirrlees'
[*Lud-in-the-Mist*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lud-in-the-Mist).
It has a geographical boundary with Faerie. At one time (within the
memory of the older inhabitants) there was regular trade, but lately
relations have deteriorated, with the merchant caravans being replaced
by waves of ... refugees. They are all what you might call “little
people” — no cosmic powers, relatively friendly (but sometimes
mischievous), and wanting to escape what they describe as wars and
catastrophes. They have been received cautiously.As the game begins,
these benign refugees have begun to be supplanted by hostiles. Think
boggarts, redcaps, kelpies, and so on. This, in turn, attracts
adventurers. At first, they're hoping for money from the town and
farmers for eliminating the menaces, but it doesn't take long for them
to think of crossing the boundary. After all, if Faerie's all torn up
by war and disaster, perhaps there are ... abandoned castles!  With
treasure!

Naturally, your avatar is one of these adventurers. And indeed, on the
other side of the boundary, there are abandoned castles, with
treasure. Not to mention somewhat nastier monsters than the ones
menacing our sleepy little non-magical country. However, the deeper
you go (in either the overworld or the dungeons), the more messed-up
things get. It appears that between war, natural disasters, and
outright magical calamities, the entire of Faerie is coming to
pieces. And the more powerful of the fair folk, the ones who built the
castles you've been looting, it seems they're all dead.

The core plot, then, is to figure out what happened and why, and maybe
do something about it. I want to keep the player's options for doing
things about it as wide open as possible. Putting the landscape back
just the way it was should be possible; redesigning everything to suit
the player and their NPC comrades, possible; torch the entire
dimension and watch the fireworks, also possible. I think I'm going to
decree that you can't resurrect the High Elves, though (this ties into
my ideas for what exactly happened to start all this, which I shall
hold for a separate spoiler post).

This overall scheme works well with a persistent overworld, relatively
short dungeon crawls, and plot levers in the “outer” game, per
Leonard's recommendation. Avatar death means you-the-player get to
pick up another n00b back in town. The things that were done in Faerie
by qprevious avatars remain done, but the board isn't static when the
avatar is elsewhere. New monsters can move into a previously cleared
out dungeon, for instance. Thus, the n00b should have no trouble
finding encounters at their level.

As the plot progresses, news will spread in the non-Faerie world that
interesting things are going on in this particular country. More
experienced adventurers may start turning up; this allows for not
having to reset quite all the way to the beginning of the experience
tree when you die. Also, NPCs will appear, probably tied to bringing
interesting artifacts out, and offer side quests.

I need a name for the border country.
