---
slug:    6128
date:    2012-11-21 02:18:02
author:  Stephen Kraushaar
email:   T+pJpgiza39g.ioedV9szgy_2k8nO.X0Wy3ekWKq8Sz5mNqITg7m_nm5E=
---

Glitch's story reminds me of the similar fate
of PMOG. In fact, I know they share many of the
same players. Justin Hall, founder of GameLayers wrote
a great post-mortem describing the struggles in detail (<a
href="http://www.raphkoster.com/2010/03/11/gdc10-justin-hall-fate-of-a-social-games-company/">http://www.raphkoster.com/2010/03/11/gdc10-justin-hall-fate-of-a-social-games-company/</a>).
I myself have been writing Nova Initia for near 3 years now with no
firm business plan in hand, but working hard to make it FUN. Justin
makes a great point that monetization needs to be planned for from the
beginning. The communities built by social games like this can lead to
great cooperation, or huge backlash when profit measures are implemented
at a later stage.

I've got all the historical evidence I need now to say this genre
won't support pay-to-play. Advertising might work, but in our
particular case it could come across as much too invasive, seeing
that the game exists on any page one browses. The end of your article
really has me thinking about self-sustaining models. NES games may
still be around, but it took worldwide army to accomplish, and it's
saving grace was having it's engine forced open source. A more
similar example of a self-sustaining game: community recreational
centers. Generally they are built with low overhead, provide fee
services to all level of sports players to collect revenue, and
maintain only as much staff as is needed to support their users. In
the end the rec center survives because of what it inherently gives
back to the community.

MMO game content doesn't survive it's passing, but blogs will live
forever on Archive.org because the provide some level of perceived
literary value. Nova Initia has a mechanic known as "Tours" which are
basically the internet equivalent of the old "chose your own
adventure" books. It's not the most robust system yet, but it's
getting there. I think we can provide the wider internet community
value through the unique way it's indexing/linking web content:
people. I've already taken steps to get these tours indexed by
Google, and I'm hoping in time the human touch given to such a broad
range of subjects will earn us a trusted place in search results. Or
a bunch of trolls could make LOLCAT tours and it will go nowhere. I
guess we'll see. Thanks for the insight and allowing me to rant.
