slug:    2946
date:    2011-12-13 15:44:07
author:  Zack Weinberg
email:   j6g2dVZwUmwz.Mr_L1Nnerr1lpNwn.FgDVohx2xaDx6B03lRDY
link:     https://www.owlfolio.org/
replyto: 2938

It is not an accident that practically all of my Cato-vs-Arishat
scenarios involved the courts: since no later than the invention of <a
href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Equity_%28law%29">equity</a> the
court system has been how this class of argument gets resolved, and
for the most part---concerns of expense and political abuse
aside---it's pretty damn good at it!  Refusing to consider the
possibility that legal process might be the best available tool for
the job is a case of NIH syndrome.  That said, I sympathize with the
argument that the legal system of any given country has to be
considered potentially hostile---but I don't think it will work to
design the system so that the courts get <i>no</i> say.  If nothing
else, that is the kind of attitude that gets your whole business
sanctioned.

I do <i>NOT</i> sympathize with the notion that Cato's only recourse
should be to publish a rebuttal.  That just plain doesn't work.
Arishat may have a much bigger megaphone, or Cato may be in a position
where anything he could say would only make the situation worse.

I also don't (for purposes of this discussion, anyway) agree with the
notion that Cato should have total, unauditable control over his own
publication space.  That leads directly to the situation where Cato
deletes every comment that disagrees with him even a little; which can
be a big deal even when Cato is a private citizen (see <a
href="https://web.archive.org/web/20121204234806/http://wiki.fandomwank.com/index.php/BALEETED!">"baleeting"
in the context of online flamewars</a>) and is definitely unacceptable
when Cato is, say, a government running a forum that is
<i>supposed</i> to be for debate of its policies, but could easily
turn into an echo chamber of yes-men.

By the way, I just edited your post to correct a typo (Arishat is a
she).  I <i>could have</i> modified your text to make you sound like a
caricature of yourself, and Wordpress wouldn't show any evidence that
it hadn't always been that way.  I didn't, but I could have.  Are you
really happy with that?
