---
slug:    11238
date:    2014-05-02 10:57:23
author:  Zack Weinberg
email:   elO7gRE9ilnL.FJjvNKPYva4qrSnh.5HfadPLBE6nTHsddeBsG
link:     https://www.owlfolio.org/
replyto: 11234
---

You have admirably summarized the contra-minimum-income position which
I am dismissing and mocking by reference when I say that we should
call it the Basic Living Stipend "just to poke David Weber in the
eye."  If you have not read those books, they detail the course of a
war (IN SPACE, but that's not important for this discussion) between
two nation-states, one of which has experienced just such an implosion
as you postulate and is now resorting to imperial expansionism to try
to make the budget balance.

I am again very busy today and don't have time to argue the contrary
case point by point, so I'm just going to hold out my basic
philosophical problem with your position: Why do you believe more than
a trivial number of people would be content to watch TV all day <i>for
their entire lives</i>?  I have had to watch TV all day for short
periods, when I was too sick to do anything else, and I was bored of
it almost instantly.

It is certainly true that there is a class of jobs (let us call them
"drudge work") which it would become impossible to pay anyone enough
to do while still making a profit.  That's a feature.  To whatever
extent that work actually needs doing, it will be automated; to
whatever extent it does <i>not</i> need doing, perhaps those
businesses will cease to exist, and that's fine.  Meanwhile, I expect
that we will see a tremendous <i>increase</i> in creative work, done
by people who are no longer forced to work drudge jobs to make ends
meet, and/or by people who can now expand the hobby that they no
longer feel guilty for "wasting time" on when they could be earning
money.

In the even larger picture, it seems to me that "is it profitable?"
has become almost totally uncorrelated with "is it something that
needs doing?"; this perhaps does not <i>completely</i> remove the
incentive to make profit at the expense of doing what needs doing, but
I don't see that you can get there from here without it.

Finally, "mail every citizen a check every month" (or, more likely,
"electronically deposit $X in every citizen's bank account every
month") requires rather <i>less</i> administrative overhead than all
of the things it replaces; and because it's unconditional, there are
no more people whose job is to ruin citizens' lives by denying them
benefits.  The volume of money being handled is greater, but the
government itself has less work to do and is less intrusive.
