---
slug:    11234
date:    2014-05-02 05:23:37
author:  Gervase Markham
email:   Mhxml0xfnfQM.sw7YVijoX1SncQrM.IatdxpKxBIY0COKdDA==
link:     http://www.gerv.net/
---

The incentive to do productive, paid work would be massively
reduced. Why should I go to work all day to earn $30,000 a year, when
I could sit at home and earn $24,000? Therefore, the GDP of the
country would shrink massively. Even if it didn't shrink as far as to
make the cost of your scheme more than 100% of the country's income,
you would effectively end up taxing at 100% everything anyone earns
above $24,000 in order to pay everyone the $24,000. And the incentive
to work would be eliminated entirely. There would be a vicious cycle
of lower incentives → lower productivity → lower GDP → tax
rises → lower incentives.

Secondly, almost all the rich and entrepreneurial people would
emigrate. There are plenty of other countries in which it is pleasant
to live who allow them to keep what they work to earn. This would
further depress your tax revenues, as you are depending on them for a
lot of it.

BTW, it is not illegal in all, or even many circumstances to shift
money around to avoid taxation. There are plenty of legal things one
can do to avoid tax. If they are illegal, it has a different name -
tax evasion. If you control a company, then tax avoidance is the thing
you have to do in order not to be sued by your shareholders for
failing in your fiduciary duty to them, and tax evasion is the thing
you have to not do in order to stay out of jail.

This plan also means that the government would have to stop doing all
the things it does _other_ than hand out money to people, in order to
pay for your program. (These vary from country to country; apologies
if not all apply in the USA.) No army, no police, no infrastructure or
road maintenance, no education, no healthcare. As it happens, I don't
think the government should provide education or healthcare, but I
suspect you do.

Lastly, all this tax taken at a federal level would mean no money left
for tax at a state level, so you would be effectively abolishing the
principle of subsidiarity in the USA, and merging the country into one
big state.

I'm not sure your experiment would be counted a success by those
watching in horror at the implosion of society.
