---
slug:    11253
date:    2014-05-05 05:47:03
author:  Gervase Markham
email:   Nqjj_24pXO6M.cgaVoIdXEcmQHzIV.AWHj_XNHMK1ch1yGVA==
link:     http://www.gerv.net/
replyto: 11238
...

"Why do you believe more than a trivial number of people would be
content to watch TV all day for their entire lives?"

Because I've met some of them? Although you narrow things too much by
saying "watch TV all day". There are certainly people who would be
content not to do productive paid work for the rest of their
lives. You agree that these people exist - in fact, it's a feature of
your system. You talk about the "large increase in creative work" -
people will quite happily spend all day writing poetry, painting
pictures, going for walks in the woods, taking photographs, if someone
else is paying them to do so. Not that there's anything wrong with any
of those things, but the idea that faced with the choice of working 40
hours a week or doing that, most people will joyfully choose the work,
seems incredible.

This really does remind me of Animal Farm, although they at least said
that it would be achieved incrementally - "There'll be a 3-day week!
Maybe even a 2-day week!". How would you compare your scheme to other
political efforts to achieve redistributive equality in the past?

The government is less intrusive on the payout side, but it's much
more intrusive (given that I count removing one's ability to do what
one likes with what one earns as 'intrusive') on the taxation
side. (Note: to avoid the straw man: I'm not arguing for zero
taxation.)

What I still don't get is, faced with the figures, how you think this
could possibly work economically, even if there was a majority in the
legislature for it? Your sums don't add up. So what's the point?
