---
slug:    686
date:    2008-05-18 06:11:12
author:  madmanatw
email:   O06C3mVYPIuW.PthyLti8SaORame8.uGFifcH2BApB8HoQR8L7K46nTrzPgMERLw==
link:     http://madmanatw.livejournal.com/
---

Yeah, that's one of the hard things. Making a hard time limit means
that if you lose a fight because you weren't ready, you have to go
back some huge amount of time and do a lot of things differently- you
can't just reload to before the fight. And no one wants that. It would
suck to have a week to perform Critical Mission, fail, and go "hmm,
how could I shave 12 hours off of the time that took me? All I can
think of is doing this part from Day 2 faster..." at which point the
next click is more likely to be "Quit" than "Reload."

For the purists among us we may wail and gnash our teeth that most
players just don't really care about that much realism, or at least
that piece of realism. The main example of it I point at is Ultima
VII, where the Big Bad is waiting for a planetary alignment. Your
handy orrery has the planets click to their next positions each time
you finished a plot point, but it would happily hover at "Real Soon
Now" for as long as you wanted to wait to get to the final room.

Not really sure what to suggest, though- U7's system would have
worked fine if it hadn't been modeling a natural phenomenon. Do
something like that only have it be sentient agencies who are
advancing their own agendas and I have no real problem with it. While
you're doing sidequests, maybe so are they. ;)
