---
date:    2012-03-07 18:09:27
author:  Alereon
email:   V5Vzc5to2khY.f7kVK9Z11+U44pRu.eJgOgcDrguNSaABdXZlbv6E=
---

Trip: No, I always skip over these posts, but I wouldn't object if people thought the general interest nature of Planet Mozilla merited them.

Moving Giveaway: No, Planet Mozilla is not Craigslist, posts should not be of narrow geographic relevance.

Pottery: No, Planet Mozilla is not Boing Boing, but if it's interesting to a general audience I wouldn't object.

Game Design: Maybe, but this is something I find interesting, so the general interest thing I keep mentioning applies. Seems slightly more relevant to Planet Mozilla than say pottery or travel.

Small Programs: Yes, same as above but again slightly more relevant.

Internet/Security/Web: Yes, this seems pretty close to the core relevance of Planet Mozilla.

In general terms, I've been surprised at the number of people who
maintain blogs that aren't narrowly focused on Mozilla-related topics
and are syndicating everything to Planet. If I had a blog that could
syndicate to Planet, that would be something I took extremely
seriously and would carefully consider before each post whether it
should go on Planet too, much like I do whenever I write something
that's going to go to a wide audience and reflect back on me and the
organization it will be published under. That could just be my
personality though. That said, I do realize that if everyone followed
that practice there would probably be some posts I liked reading on
Planet that I would have never seen. However, I'm also quite confident
that I missed posts that I would have liked to read on Planet because
they were pushed off the page by stuff I didn't care about.
