---
slug:    3119
date:    2012-03-07 22:33:46
author:  Steve Fink
email:   pYXDkWu4v_Hv.v4T0jnNKiI5fE1Z1.shVkUIh8EMIIoILh0XlHrw==
link:     https://blog.mozilla.com/sfink/
---

I think it's hard to come up with a good set of rules. I find most
travel reports to be incredibly dull and wish they would just go
away---but I remember reading one about visiting Peru that was really
cool. (From Laura, maybe? Can't remember now.)

I do highly recommend controlling what gets syndicated to Planet,
though. I use tags for the purpose. (And I have separate 'mozilla' and
'planet' tags. The vast majority of posts tagged 'mozilla' are also
tagged 'planet', but I've used each tag individually too.) It's not
just for the benefit of other people; it also means that you feel free
to write something without needing to consider how Planet readers
might react to it. You more fully own your own blog.

My one request for Planet authors is to use readmore tags, or whatever
your blog software uses to select the text to appear "above the fold"
in an RSS feed. *Especially* if the post is long, no matter how
interesting you expect it to be to Planet readers. I'm fine with
anyone posting anything as long as I can decide whether to skip it in
a second or three and don't need to scroll for miles to get past
it. (I use Google Reader.)

In a more perfect world, RSS feeds would carry tags through, we'd all
agree on a basic set of tags, and I could filter all of Planet that
way. Oh, and readers could suggest/override/vote on tags for some
collaborative filtering. And everyone would use it. (I'm sure the
functionality exists somewhere, but I'm pretty sure the buy-in
doesn't.)
