---
date:    2012-03-08 02:11:39
author:  RNiK
email:   wfnn+YsoAgmh.7c7SVTt9F+0G_cvC.8OztxKKVE6GEZax5DPj_8Hi_1ZM=
link:     http://www.mondowin.com/blog/
---

Well, it's Planet <strong>Mozilla</strong>.

In your recent trip to $COUNTRY you visited Mozilla Communities/Mozilla Offices? Feed it to PM.

Offers to give away unwanted items prior to moving - I find it difficult to be related to Mozilla Word so don't feed it to PM.

Musings about pottery- I find it difficult to be related to Mozilla Word so don't feed it to PM.

Musings about video game design - Web/HTML5 video game? Design concept/feature applicable to Web/HTML5? Feed it to PM.

Various Internet-security-related topics which may or may not have anything to do with The Web - Generally speaking I would say "Feed it to PM". The topic however is quite mixed so it depends on your sensibility.

Incredibly hypothetical ideas, zany schemes, and related philosophizing - Can your ideas, schemes and philosophy concepts help Mozilla Community members? Feed it to PM.

Detailed reports on my academic research - I don't know what your academic research are about.

Explanations for a lay audience of how to use the Internet safely - Always useful. Feed it to PM.

Summaries of the research presented at $CONFERENCE - Again, $CONFERENCE about what?

In the end I consider the above list useless. I expect every Mozillian
<i>mature</i> enough to understand what to post or do-not-post on
PM. Yeah, Gerv post proved I'm wrong, but it has been an isolated
case.
