---
title: Save the world? Sure, but let’s collect every bit of treasure first.
date: 2008-05-17 23:53
---

[queenpam](http://queenpam.livejournal.com/) and I have been playing
some old (or not-so-old) PS2 games: we're totally done with *Kingdom
Hearts 2*, are going back through *Ratchet and Clank* to pick up all the
“skill points” (optional mini-challenges), we're about half done with
*Shadow of the Colossus*, and *God of War* is currently on hold because
we got fed up with the underwater
stay-ahead-of-the-thing-that-smashes-you-into-the-wall task, after being
smashed into the wall ... I'm going to say at least two dozen times. So
I am in a mood to blather about game design.

These games all *feel* very different, but fundamentally they're the
same kind of game: single PC (possibly with one or two helpers) goes
through 3D world in over-the-shoulder-vision, fights monsters using a
variety of hand-to-hand and ranged weapons, solves lethal puzzles,
eventually confronts Big Bad, saves world. (Or maybe just Athens. Or his
dead girlfriend.) And they all have the same odd relation to time: time
only advances when player actions trigger plot events. This is most
blatant in *Kingdom Hearts*. You fight the Nobodies all the way to the
top of their castle and drive their leader to retreat into the giant
floating candy heart. Mickey Mouse¹ tells you that you must follow
immediately, and defeat him once and for all. But there is a save point.
Like all save points, it allows you to warp back to the over-map, which
means you (the player) can spend *as long as you like* polishing off all
the optional challenges, collecting every single treasure chest, and
leveling up the PC until the final battle is a cakewalk. In terms of
gameplay hours, I think we spent almost as long doing optional
challenges as we did playing the main game, and we *weren't done!* We
gave up on some of the ridiculously hard or irritating ones.

This doesn't especially *bother* me in *Kingdom Hearts*, because, after
all, most of zones in the game are the settings of various Disney
movies. You're not playing this game for the internal self-consistency.
Also, I haven't ever played a *Final Fantasy* game from beginning to
end, but I have the impression that this is part of the furniture of
that series. It would bother me more in *Ratchet and Clank*, which *is*
trying for internal self-consistency (if not for plausibility), but it's
also rather less blatant there: you have the option of delaying the
final confrontation as long as you like, even though the Big Bad is
going to destroy your planet Real Soon Now (and you may need to, in
order to earn enough bolts to pay for the uberweapon without which
defeating the Big Bad is ridiculously hard) but the Big Bad is the sort
of lunatic who *would* postpone the completion of his project just to
laugh at you for showing up just barely too late. (Also, you can go back
and do the optional challenges after you defeat him.)

It really, really bugs me in *God of War*, even though they may not be
doing the “postpone the final confrontation indefinitely” blatant
version (we haven't got there yet) — the PC has to go off to some desert
and find a weapon that can kill a god, so he can defeat Ares, who is
laying waste to Athens. Right then. With an army of monsters. Retrieving
the weapon takes something like a week of in-game time. I don't see how
there can possibly be any of Athens left by the time the PC gets back!
... Really, though, my objection here is not to the timescale, but to
the whole plan of saving Athens by sending a hero off to the desert to
retrieve a god-slaying weapon from such a deathtrap of a temple that
Indiana Jones himself would quail. We got him smashed into the wall at
least two dozen times. That's twenty-four universes in which he never
came back. Never mind all the *other* traps, many of which killed him at
least once. And did I mention the monsters? If I were Athena I would go
kill Ares myself, and worry about how to patch things up with Zeus
later. (Or maybe I should just kill him too! He ate my mother because he
was afraid their child, me, would kill him! This is Ancient Greece! You
know that means I've got to do it one of these days!)

It doesn't come up at all in *Shadow of the Colossus*, but only because
that game's more linear than any of the above. You can't even kill the
colossi out of order. (There must be something preventing your dead
girlfriend from rotting away all this time, but I'm prepared to assume
the disembodied voice who's promised to resurrect her if you just do
this small favor for it first [Wikipedia tells me its name is Dormin]
can do that.)

... I had a point somewhere in here. Maybe it's that this is another way
it's hard to make a game also be a convincing secondary world. My
suspension of disbelief is impaired because these games have done enough
that my brain is filling in things that *should* happen and being
tripped up when they don't. But if you made those things happen, the
game would actually be a worse game! You don't want to force the player
to do the final battle before they're good and ready. Also, I probably
wouldn't have noticed so much if the optional side quests had all been
interesting rather than tedious; and if there are simple adjustments one
could make to the plot to alleviate these problems (like, Ares' army is
going to be in Athens in a week, and Athena wants you standing at the
gates with the godslayer weapon when they get there) one should make
those adjustments.

¹ Yes, that Mickey Mouse. The same one who's in *Steamboat Willie.*
