---
slug:    2245
date:    2011-09-19 22:28:37
author:  Mook
email:   QIbl9xKwwDIL.snfdhsYEVO8VVG08.B3hvBYpn5zKiOw2DKf_K_qK8MDU2ULtUarRklNOt4VFI4+baECffzeRyP9ZeM8sJR_w=
...

I suppose the abandonment of freezing interfaces was good, but only
when viewed as stopping a charade.  My pet bug for that is bug 269323,
filed Nov 11, 2004 and WONTFIXed July 25, 2010.  It concerns
attempting to freeze an interface that hasn't changed (other than
comments) since Feb 24, 2003 (up to current mozilla-central).  Most
people attempting to use it really just wanted the OS-native toplevel
window handle.  Simply put, not nearly enough interfaces were frozen
to be useful - and it's not even as if it was impossible to simply
stop supporting that interface completely; nsIEnumerator (!=
nsISimpleEnumerator) pretty much died without any problems because the
API was horrible for JS consumers.

The avoidance of interface changes only happened on release branches,
never trunk - on trunk, interfaces can (and do!) change at will.  The
only people that tried to avoid interface changing were doing that
because binary extensions were using them - and <em>that</em> was
really a symptom of not freezing interfaces early enough, since people
were obviously finding them useful enough to try to use externally.

Not that matters, anyway - the declaration to discard the concept for
frozen interfaces happened in Firefox 4 (Gecko 2), but rapid releases
actually started with Firefox 5 (Gecko 5).  The release scheduling has
nothing to do with interfaces, and tying the two together is just
muddying the waters.

Binary components are being removed due to perceived (and actual)
crashshiness; however, there seemed to have been little work on the
Mozilla side to try to help external developers make them less crashy.
Instead, it's just outright banning with no adequate replacement.
(JS-ctypes is still rather poorly documented, has few users in the
tree other than over-complicated and condensed test cases.)  Much like
the rapid release cycle before silent updates, this seems to be a case
of putting the cart before the horse.

If addons are for power users, then <a
href="https://blog.mozilla.com/addons/2011/06/21/firefox-4-add-on-users/"
>85%</a> of all Firefox users are power users.
Regardless of what market you want to be in, that's a pretty big chunk
of the actual user base :)

I think the fact that Mozilla is having trouble catching up to Webkit
is two-fold: one, the obvious problems with a codebase from the
mid-90s that wanted to be compatible with a whole bunch of systems
that don't really do C++; and two, a consistent problem in getting
external contributors.  The first part results in the second somewhat,
of course - but also, reviews are too slow to maintain momentum, and
core developers all work on the same product for the same company,
with no regard for external developer and therefore alienating people
with frequent breakage.  I don't find it particularly surprising
(given past and present attitudes) that the only <a
href="https://wiki.mozilla.org/Modules/All">modules</a>
with a owner that didn't get there via employment at MoCo are xptcall
(timeless) and jsd (timeless again, and as far as I know he wasn't
being involved in the jsd2 work).

Even with all the complaining, of course, I'm likely to stick around -
it's just been frustrating seeing what seems to be a reality
distortion field around people involved in MoCo/MoFo with little
acknowledgement of the pain of the people who don't ship Firefox.  I
certainly didn't intend to single you out - this post's just sort of
been the straw that broke the camel's back.  If you can think of
better venues where feedback would actually be listened to, I'd
appreciate any information on that.
