---
slug:    2247
date:    2011-09-19 23:19:41
author:  Dan
email:   F3WO3rqcTUGC.b4zYbwS_DKxQZOkT.gq2Hei5AUR4bCbKnVHKXNyU=
replyto: 2243
---

We most certainly can learn from many of the things you're calling
mistakes without "acknowledging" that they were mistakes.

A lot of design decisions etc made sense when they were made-- an era
which is dramatically different from today. Different constraints on
resources (cpu, memory, disk space, programmer time), different
compilers and OS environments, different web formats, different ideas
about the web's future development, et cetera et cetera ad
infinitum. New design ideas, new algorithms, and all kinds of other
information have come to light since those days as well.

In particular, making a truly cross-platform application is not as
scary a proposition these days as it was in the days when nglayout was
new. You've already mentioned how unix api consolidation makes nspr
not as necessary as it was in the 90s. I don't know enough about moz
internals to know all of how this effects things, but I imagine a
*lot* of things are simplified by the disappearance of the two
platforms which were dominant in the pre-1.0 days; Windows 9x and
pre-OSX MacOS were odd beasts in a lot of ways.  C++ compiler interop
was also a huge headache; even gcc didn't really get things right
until 3.4 in 2004. Cross-platform UI toolkits were basically a joke,
and the closest thing to a cross-platform drawing api was a
long-forgotten idiosyncrasy of the NeXT platform (Display PostScript).

Designing a way to write as much of the browser as possible in XML etc
was not only an interesting pre-AJAX idea for how the web could become
a development platform but also a survival mechanism in a very
cross-platform-hostile world.
