content/pages/about.md, before:

Title: About Me
Date: 2012-05-20 20:26
Slug: about

Hello, my name is Zachary Weinberg.  I go by “Zack,” except on
paper. Pleased to meet you.

I’m about thirty-five years old, and I grew up in the suburbs of Los
Angeles, California.  I’m presently doing Internet security research
in the
[ECE department of Carnegie Mellon University](http://www.ece.cmu.edu/).
Before that I worked for the
[Mozilla Corporation](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/foundation/moco/);
before *that*, I studied how people understand language at
[UC San Diego](http://www.cogsci.ucsd.edu/); and back when dinosaurs
roamed the Earth, I was a core [GCC](http://gcc.gnu.org/) developer.

My interests range all over the sciences and a little way into
philosophy, plus some of the arts (notably, candle-making, pottery,
and game design).  This website is intended to capture all of the
ideas that to date haven’t made it out of the back of my mind, so will
be wide-ranging as well.

### Glossary {#glossary}

If you meet me in person, you may hear me say some of these things:

Have fun!

  ~ I often say this when people are departing to do something not
    normally considered fun, like grocery shopping.  Probably picked up
    from Pam and her mother, who also do this.

I’m turning into a pumpkin

  ~ “I’m exhausted,” or “I need to leave soon.”  I also say “I will
    turn into a pumpkin at (time)” to warn people that I will be leaving
    at a particular time.

    A Cinderella reference, naturally.  I used to think I was the only
    person who said this, but it turns out that my mother and
    grandmother say it too.

I think we all know what consciousness is

  ~ Pam and I say this when someone has just skimmed blithely past
    a major unresolved scientific or philosophical question.  We’re
    quoting someone who said it without a trace of irony, during a
    discussion on a cognitive science mailing list.

Say again?

  ~ I have trouble hearing people over background noise.  I use
    this bit of military/aviator jargon instead of “Huh?” or “What?”
    because it unambiguously expresses “I didn’t *hear* what you
    said” rather than “I didn’t *understand* what you said.”

The thing my aunt gave me that I don’t know what it is

  ~ I never say this verbatim, but I use this construction (“that” or
    “which” followed by a complete sentence) all the time, contra
    typical English usage.  I think I got it from the object with a
    very similar name in the
    [*Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy* text adventure](http://www.bbc.co.uk/h2g2game).

Who shuffled this mess?

  ~ When playing cards, means “This hand is so terrible that I don’t
    believe the deck was shuffled properly.”  By extension, can be
    used to complain about any sort of bad luck.

    From my grandmother, who would often say it and then go on to win
    the round anyway.  For maximum humor, say it when *you* shuffled
    the mess in question.

### Colophon {#colophon}

Site design was done by me, with a great deal of help from
[Pam Griffith](http://www.pamgriffith.net/), whose design-fu is far
superior.

Headings are set in
[Mostra Nuova](http://www.marksimonson.com/fonts/view/mostra-nuova).
Body fonts depend on your operating system and browser.  All graphic
decorations were drawn by me.  The owl in the top left (if your screen
is wide enough) is a modified tracing from a photograph of the
decorative owls in the elevator lobby of the
[Chicago Board of Trade Building](http://www.cbotbuilding.com/photo-gallery/landmark/).
Backgrounds are currently solid colors.

The CMS is [Pelican](http://getpelican.com/), with a theme customized
from the ground up for this site.  If it doesn’t look terrible in old
versions of Internet Explorer, that is thanks to
[the HTML5 Shiv](https://github.com/aFarkas/html5shiv).

Hosting is at
[NearlyFreeSpeech.NET](https://www.nearlyfreespeech.net/), which I do
recommend, but if this site appears to load faster than others, it’s
probably more because of
[Steve Souders’ advice](http://www.stevesouders.com/hpws/).

I write all my posts in
[Pandoc-flavor Markdown](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/README.html),
because HTML is far too verbose to put up with while composing, but
WYSIWYG ceased to be my friend in the days of Microsoft Word 4.0.

Commit message:

Better background and better link colors.

content/pages/about.md, after:

Title: About Me
Date: 2012-05-20 20:26
Slug: about

Hello, my name is Zachary Weinberg.  I go by “Zack,” except on
paper. Pleased to meet you.

I’m about thirty-five years old, and I grew up in the suburbs of Los
Angeles, California.  I’m presently doing Internet security research
in the
[ECE department of Carnegie Mellon University](http://www.ece.cmu.edu/).
Before that I worked for the
[Mozilla Corporation](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/foundation/moco/);
before *that*, I studied how people understand language at
[UC San Diego](http://www.cogsci.ucsd.edu/); and back when dinosaurs
roamed the Earth, I was a core [GCC](http://gcc.gnu.org/) developer.

My interests range all over the sciences and a little way into
philosophy, plus some of the arts (notably, candle-making, pottery,
and game design).  This website is intended to capture all of the
ideas that to date haven’t made it out of the back of my mind, so will
be wide-ranging as well.

### Glossary {#glossary}

If you meet me in person, you may hear me say some of these things:

Have fun!

  ~ I often say this when people are departing to do something not
    normally considered fun, like grocery shopping.  Probably picked up
    from Pam and her mother, who also do this.

I’m turning into a pumpkin

  ~ “I’m exhausted,” or “I need to leave soon.”  I also say “I will
    turn into a pumpkin at (time)” to warn people that I will be leaving
    at a particular time.

    A Cinderella reference, naturally.  I used to think I was the only
    person who said this, but it turns out that my mother and
    grandmother say it too.

I think we all know what consciousness is

  ~ Pam and I say this when someone has just skimmed blithely past
    a major unresolved scientific or philosophical question.  We’re
    quoting someone who said it without a trace of irony, during a
    discussion on a cognitive science mailing list.

Say again?

  ~ I have trouble hearing people over background noise.  I use
    this bit of military/aviator jargon instead of “Huh?” or “What?”
    because it unambiguously expresses “I didn’t *hear* what you
    said” rather than “I didn’t *understand* what you said.”

The thing my aunt gave me that I don’t know what it is

  ~ I never say this verbatim, but I use this construction (“that” or
    “which” followed by a complete sentence) all the time, contra
    typical English usage.  I think I got it from the object with a
    very similar name in the
    [*Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy* text adventure](http://www.bbc.co.uk/h2g2game).

Who shuffled this mess?

  ~ When playing cards, means “This hand is so terrible that I don’t
    believe the deck was shuffled properly.”  By extension, can be
    used to complain about any sort of bad luck.

    From my grandmother, who would often say it and then go on to win
    the round anyway.  For maximum humor, say it when *you* shuffled
    the mess in question.

### Colophon {#colophon}

Site design was done by me, with a great deal of help from
[Pam Griffith](http://www.pamgriffith.net/), whose design-fu is far
superior.

Headings are set in
[Mostra Nuova](http://www.marksimonson.com/fonts/view/mostra-nuova).
Body fonts depend on your operating system and browser.  All graphic
decorations were drawn by me.  The owl in the top left (if your screen
is wide enough) is a modified tracing from a photograph of the
decorative owls in the elevator lobby of the
[Chicago Board of Trade Building](http://www.cbotbuilding.com/photo-gallery/landmark/).
The chevron pattern in the background is based on the
[black and gold pattern seen on this moribund website](https://web.archive.org/web/20141218065258/http://shipwreckradio.com/);
if anyone knows where it came from, please tell me.

The CMS is [Pelican](http://getpelican.com/), with a theme customized
from the ground up for this site.  If it doesn’t look terrible in old
versions of Internet Explorer, that is thanks to
[the HTML5 Shiv](https://github.com/aFarkas/html5shiv).

Hosting is at
[NearlyFreeSpeech.NET](https://www.nearlyfreespeech.net/), which I do
recommend, but if this site appears to load faster than others, it’s
probably more because of
[Steve Souders’ advice](http://www.stevesouders.com/hpws/).

I write all my posts in
[Pandoc-flavor Markdown](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/README.html),
because HTML is far too verbose to put up with while composing, but
WYSIWYG ceased to be my friend in the days of Microsoft Word 4.0.
