---
slug:    1083
date:    2010-05-12 06:25:09
author:  Si Dawson
email:   KA8WYCDhCgrA.tGP2FytdRbC5TTbV.an7WU8L0vRZiwxF7hYcUjQlagrKH
link:     https://thetwitcleaner.com/blog/
...

Some very interesting points you raise here.

First - yes, us appearing on the reports is just a result of a slight
hiccup with our recent name change from @TheTwitCleaner to
@TwitCleaner. It's fixed now, so won't happen any more.

You've identified a core limitation of the service - namely, that it's
aimed at Twitter as a conversational medium. Thus, any account not
fitting those aims (eg the announcement channels you list) won't fit
into that behaviour pattern & will be flagged.

The real difficulty is - there's no way to reliably identify "Accounts
that don't interact, except these accounts that I like." As a simple
example - you like @NBCOlympics, even though they're using Twitter
solely as a broadcast medium (like a newspaper), personally, if I want
a push medium, I'll use RSS, read a blog, or yes, a newspaper. I use
Twitter to interact with people. So, who's right? Well, neither of
us. We just use Twitter in different ways. The only solution is to
flag the behaviour types, & give each user the choice.

There's also a lot of subtlety that comes back & bites you once you
start fine-tuning these algorithms - things that aren't obvious when
looking at a small handful of accounts, but only when looking at
millions. Eg - the suggestion to ignore those accounts with extreme
following/follower ratios. The catch is - they're appearing in a
category specifically FOR accounts with extreme ratios. If you remove
them left, there's no category left. It would also be very easy for a
spammer to game the system by simply unfollowing everyone, voila their
ratio goes up & they're instantly whitelisted.

Ditto those accounts that only post links, or the same link, etc.

It is useful information - particularly when people use auto-follow
scripts, they can end up following all sorts of random accounts, many
of which will not be useful to their aims - thus it should be on the
report. Of course, it's up to each individual user to say (as you
have) "You know what? I don't care about people that only post
links/post dupes/etc"

At that point, the best solution is simply to select-to-save the
entire category.

There's also another option - which is simply to have a report that
(for you) doesn't have that option displayed at all. For people that
follow a lot of news sources, & rss feeds etc, this would make the
most amount of sense.

People appearing on the report is orthogonal to whether they're
verified. Verification just says that the person is who they say they
are. That has nothing to do with whether they're spouting rubbish or
not. Ideally, of course, they're not, but if they flag any categories,
they should definitely appear.

I do have a small exception in there - that if someone is listed as a
celeb (low following/follower ratio), but they follow YOU, they won't
appear on your report. Why? Coz who cares if they're snobbish to
everyone else if they're friendly with you, right? :)

Lurkers are interesting. I don't think there's any value in
distinguishing between accounts that have NEVER posted vs those that
post rarely - simply because the number of accounts that have zero
tweets is vanishingly small. There's also the intriguing false
positive - which is much more common, that people HAVE tweeted, but
then delete all their tweets. Why do they do this? Who knows, but it
happens relatively often.

Following people that never post is a personal choice of
course. People I know personally I do, people I don't I don't. But
again, it shows on the report for informational purposes, it's up to
you who you want to keep or not.

I'm not sure if you have multiple accounts or not - but a lot of the
things I'm describing make nearly no sense if you're only following a
small handful of people (up to a few hundred). At that point, you can
easily remember & distinguish between them all. There's no surprises
in your list. Above that though, it's often very, VERY helpful to have
the subtleties of those you're following pointed out to you.

Fictional character accounts I have no easy answer for. Getting into
graph analysis is a big, big subject, & something we're definitely not
set up for at present. I suspect if we were going to be getting into
that field, there would be a TON of useful analysis & interpretation
we could do - such that fictional characters would fall out nicely as
simply a subset of a much larger set of personally-useful-accounts.

All good food for thought though, & I definitely appreciate you
raising these points. Always good to cover old ground & rethink all
the basic assumptions.
